README.md, before:

# Cockroach [![Circle CI](https://circleci.com/gh/cockroachdb/cockroach.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/cockroachdb/cockroach) [![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach?status.png)](https://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach) ![Project Status](http://img.shields.io/badge/status-alpha-red.svg)

## A Scalable, Geo-Replicated, Transactional Datastore

<img align="right" src="/resources/doc/color_cockroach.png?raw=true"/>

**Table of Contents**

- [Status](#status)
- [Running Cockroach](#running-cockroach)
- [Get in touch](#get-in-touch)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Design](#design) and [Datastore Goal Articulation](#datastore-goal-articulation)
- [Architecture](#architecture) and [Client Architecture](#client-architecture)

[![WIRED on CockroachDB](/resources/doc/wired-preview.png?raw=true)](http://www.wired.com/2014/07/cockroachdb/)

## Status

**ALPHA**

* Gossip network
* Distributed transactions
* Cluster initialization and joining
* Basic Key-Value REST API
* Range splitting

**Next Steps**

* Raft consensus
* Rebalancing

See [TODO.md](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/TODO.md)

## Running Cockroach

Don't have (a recent version > 1.2 of) Docker? Follow the [instructions for installing Docker on your host system](http://docs.docker.com/installation/). If you run into trouble below, check first that you're not running an old version.

Now, pick your `$IMAGE`:
* `cockroachdb/cockroach` for the small, deploy-only image - ideal if you just
  want to play around
* `cockroachdb/cockroach-dev` if you want the development image - comes with
  a complete build toolchain and support for running the tests but is large.

We'll use `cockroachdb/cockroach` below for simplicity.
If you don't want to use Docker,
* set up the dev environment (see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md))
* `make build`
* replace `docker [...] [run|build] [...]` by `./cockroach` below.

#### Bootstrap and talk to a single node

```bash
$ docker run -d -p 8080:8080 "cockroachdb/cockroach" \
    init -rpc="localhost:0" \
    -certs="resources/test_certs" \
    -stores="ssd=/tmp/db"
```
This bootstraps and starts a single node with one temporary RocksDB instance at /tmp/db in the background (remove the `-d` flag if you want to see stdout).
Now let's talk to this node:
```bash
$ curl -X POST -d "Hello" http://localhost:8080/kv/rest/entry/Cockroach
```
```json
{"header":{"timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616834949813367,"logical":0}}}
```
```bash
$ curl http://localhost:8080/kv/rest/entry/Cockroach
```
```json
{"header":{"timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616886486257568,"logical":0}},"value":{"bytes":"SGVsbG8=","timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616834949813367,"logical":0}}}
```
Note that `SGVsbG8=` equals `base64("Hello")`.

Among other things, you can also scan a key range:
```bash
$ curl "http://localhost:8080/kv/rest/range/?start=Ca&end=Cozz&limit=10"
```
```json
{"header":{"timestamp":{"wall_time":1416617120031733436,"logical":0}},"rows":[{"key":"Q29ja3JvYWNo","value":{"bytes":"SGVsbG8=","timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616834949813367,"logical":0}}}]}
```
Note that `Q29ja3JvYWNo` equals `base64("Cockroach")`.

#### Local Cluster Setup

*        (cd run; ./local-cluster.sh [start|stop])

#### Building the Docker images yourself
you can build both of the above images yourself:

* `cockroachdb/cockroach-dev`: `(cd build ; ./build-docker-dev.sh)`
* `cockroachdb/cockroach`: `(cd build ; ./build-docker-deploy.sh)`
  (this will build the first image as well)

Once you've built your image, you may want to run the tests:
* `docker run "cockroachdb/cockroach-dev" test`
* `make acceptance`

## Get in touch

+ cockroach-db@googlegroups.com
+ \#cockroachdb on freenode

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Design

For full design details, see the [original design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11k2EmhLGSbViBvi6_zFEiKzuXxYF49ZuuDJLe6O8gBU/edit?usp=sharing).

For a quick design overview, see the [Cockroach tech talk slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1e3TOxImRg6_nyMZspXvzb2u43D6gnS5422vAIN7J1n8/edit?usp=sharing)
or watch a presentation of the tech talk
* [at Yelp!](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEAuFgsmND0&feature=youtu.be) by [Spencer Kimball](https://github.com/spencerkimball) (9/5/2014)
* [at the NoSQL User Group Cologne](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jI3LiKhqN0E) by [Tobias Schottdorf](https://github.com/tschottdorf) (11/5/2014).

Cockroach is a distributed key/value datastore which supports ACID
transactional semantics and versioned values as first-class
features. The primary design goal is global consistency and
survivability, hence the name. Cockroach aims to tolerate disk,
machine, rack, and even datacenter failures with minimal latency
disruption and no manual intervention. Cockroach nodes are symmetric;
a design goal is one binary with minimal configuration and no required
auxiliary services.

Cockroach implements a single, monolithic sorted map from key to value
where both keys and values are byte strings (not unicode). Cockroach
scales linearly (theoretically up to 4 exabytes (4E) of logical
data). The map is composed of one or more ranges and each range is
backed by data stored in [RocksDB][0] (a variant of [LevelDB][1]), and is
replicated to a total of three or more cockroach servers. Ranges are
defined by start and end keys. Ranges are merged and split to maintain
total byte size within a globally configurable min/max size
interval. Range sizes default to target 64M in order to facilitate
quick splits and merges and to distribute load at hotspots within a
key range. Range replicas are intended to be located in disparate
datacenters for survivability (e.g. { US-East, US-West, Japan }, {
Ireland, US-East, US-West}, { Ireland, US-East, US-West, Japan,
Australia }).

Single mutations to ranges are mediated via an instance of a
distributed consensus algorithm to ensure consistency. We’ve chosen to
use the [Raft consensus algorithm][2]. All consensus state is stored in
[RocksDB][0].

A single logical mutation may affect multiple key/value pairs. Logical
mutations have ACID transactional semantics. If all keys affected by a
logical mutation fall within the same range, atomicity and consistency
are guaranteed by [Raft][2]; this is the fast commit path. Otherwise, a
non-locking distributed commit protocol is employed between affected
ranges.

Cockroach provides snapshot isolation (SI) and serializable snapshot
isolation (SSI) semantics, allowing externally consistent, lock-free
reads and writes--both from an historical snapshot timestamp and from
the current wall clock time. SI provides lock-free reads and writes
but still allows write skew. SSI eliminates write skew, but introduces
a performance hit in the case of a contentious system. SSI is the
default isolation; clients must consciously decide to trade
correctness for performance. Cockroach implements a limited form of
linearalizability, providing ordering for any observer or chain of
observers.

Similar to [Spanner][3] directories, Cockroach allows configuration of
arbitrary zones of data. This allows replication factor, storage
device type, and/or datacenter location to be chosen to optimize
performance and/or availability. Unlike Spanner, zones are monolithic
and don’t allow movement of fine grained data on the level of entity
groups.

A [Megastore][4]-like message queue mechanism is also provided to 1)
efficiently sideline updates which can tolerate asynchronous execution
and 2) provide an integrated message queuing system for asynchronous
communication between distributed system components.

#### SQL - NoSQL - NewSQL Capabilities

![SQL - NoSQL - NewSQL Capabilities](/resources/doc/sql-nosql-newsql.png?raw=true)

## Datastore Goal Articulation

There are other important axes involved in data-stores which are less
well understood and/or explained. There is lots of cross-dependency,
but it's safe to segregate two more of them as (a) scan efficiency,
and (b) read vs write optimization.

#### Datastore Scan Efficiency Spectrum

Scan efficiency refers to the number of IO ops required to scan a set
of sorted adjacent rows matching a criteria. However, it's a
complicated topic, because of the options (or lack of options) for
controlling physical order in different systems.

* Some designs either default to or only support "heap organized"
  physical records (Oracle, MySQL, Postgres, SQLite, MongoDB). In this
  design, a naive sorted-scan of an index involves one IO op per
  record.
* In these systems it's possible to "fully cover" a sorted-query in an
  index with some write-amplification.
* In some systems it's possible to put the primary record data in a
  sorted btree instead of a heap-table (default in MySQL/Innodb,
  option in Oracle).
* Sorted-order LSM NoSQL could be considered index-organized-tables,
  with efficient scans by the row-key. (HBase).
* Some NoSQL is not optimized for sorted-order retrieval, because of
  hash-bucketing, primarily based on the Dynamo design. (Cassandra,
  Riak)

![Datastore Scan Efficiency Spectrum](/resources/doc/scan-efficiency.png?raw=true)

#### Read vs. Write Optimization Spectrum

Read vs write optimization is a product of the underlying sorted-order
data-structure used. Btrees are read-optimized. Hybrid write-deferred
trees are a balance of read-and-write optimizations (shuttle-trees,
fractal-trees, stratified-trees). LSM separates write-incorporation
into a separate step, offering a tunable amount of read-to-write
optimization. An "ideal" LSM at 0%-write-incorporation is a log, and
at 100%-write-incorporation is a btree.

The topic of LSM is confused by the fact that LSM is not an algorithm,
but a design pattern, and usage of LSM is hindered by the lack of a
de-facto optimal LSM design. LevelDB/RocksDB is one of the more
practical LSM implementations, but it is far from optimal. Popular
text-indicies like Lucene are non-general purpose instances of
write-optimized LSM.

Further, there is a dependency between access pattern
(read-modify-write vs blind-write and write-fraction), cache-hitrate,
and ideal sorted-order algorithm selection. At a certain
write-fraction and read-cache-hitrate, systems achieve higher total
throughput with write-optimized designs, at the cost of increased
worst-case read latency. As either write-fraction or
read-cache-hitrate approaches 1.0, write-optimized designs provide
dramatically better sustained system throughput when record-sizes are
small relative to IO sizes.

Given this information, data-stores can be sliced by their
sorted-order storage algorithm selection. Btree stores are
read-optimized (Oracle, SQLServer, Postgres, SQLite2, MySQL, MongoDB,
CouchDB), hybrid stores are read-optimized with better
write-throughput (Tokutek MySQL/MongoDB), while LSM-variants are
write-optimized (HBase, Cassandra, SQLite3/LSM, Cockroach).

![Read vs. Write Optimization Spectrum](/resources/doc/read-vs-write.png?raw=true)

## Architecture

Cockroach implements a layered architecture, with various
subdirectories implementing layers as appropriate. The highest level of
abstraction is the SQL layer (currently not implemented). It depends
directly on the [structured data API][5] ([structured/][6]). The structured
data API provides familiar relational concepts such as schemas,
tables, columns, and indexes. The structured data API in turn depends
on the [distributed key value store][7] ([kv/][8]). The distributed key
value store handles the details of range addressing to provide the
abstraction of a single, monolithic key value store. It communicates
with any number of [cockroach nodes][9] ([server/][10]), storing the actual
data. Each node contains one or more [stores][11] ([storage/][12]), one per
physical device.

![Cockroach Architecture](/resources/doc/architecture.png?raw=true)

Each store contains potentially many ranges, the lowest-level unit of
key-value data. Ranges are replicated using the [Raft][2] consensus
protocol. The diagram below is a blown up version of stores from four
of the five nodes in the previous diagram. Each range is replicated
three ways using raft. The color coding shows associated range
replicas.

![Range Architecture Blowup](/resources/doc/architecture-blowup.png?raw=true)

## Client Architecture

Cockroach nodes serve client traffic on two primary HTTP endpoints: a
RESTful endpoint which treats key/value pairs and sequences of
key/value pairs as resources; and a fully-featured key/value DB API
which accepts requests as either application/x-protobuf or
application/json. Client implementations consist of an HTTP sender
(transport) and a transactional sender which implements a simple
exponential backoff / retry protocol, depending on Cockroach error
codes.

The REST and DB client gateways accept incoming requests and send them
through a transaction coordinator, which handles transaction
heartbeats on behalf of clients, provides optimization pathways, and
resolves write intents on transaction commit or abort. The transaction
coordinator passes requests onto a distributed sender, which looks up
index metadata, caches the results, and routes internode RPC traffic
based on where the index metadata indicates keys are located in the
distributed cluster.

In addition to the gateways for external REST and DB client traffic,
each Cockroach node provides the full key/value API (including all
internal methods) via a Go RPC server endpoint. The RPC server
endpoint forwards requests to one or more local stores depending
on the specified key range.

Internally, each Cockroach node uses the Go implementation of the
Cockroach client in order to transactionally update system key/value
data; for example during split and merge operations to update index
metadata records. Unlike an external application, the internal client
eschews the HTTP sender and instead directly shares the transaction
coordinator and distributed sender used by the REST and DB client
gateways.

![Client Architecture](/resources/doc/client-architecture.png?raw=true)

[0]: http://rocksdb.org/
[1]: https://code.google.com/p/leveldb/
[2]: https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/wiki/download/attachments/11370504/raft.pdf
[3]: http://research.google.com/archive/spanner.html
[4]: http://research.google.com/pubs/pub36971.html
[5]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/structured
[6]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/structured
[7]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/kv
[8]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/kv
[9]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/server
[10]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/server
[11]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/storage
[12]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/storage

Commit message:

mention rest explorer; update outdated comment

README.md, after:

# Cockroach [![Circle CI](https://circleci.com/gh/cockroachdb/cockroach.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/cockroachdb/cockroach) [![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach?status.png)](https://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach) ![Project Status](http://img.shields.io/badge/status-alpha-red.svg)

## A Scalable, Geo-Replicated, Transactional Datastore

<img align="right" src="/resources/doc/color_cockroach.png?raw=true"/>

**Table of Contents**

- [Status](#status)
- [Running Cockroach](#running-cockroach)
- [Get in touch](#get-in-touch)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Design](#design) and [Datastore Goal Articulation](#datastore-goal-articulation)
- [Architecture](#architecture) and [Client Architecture](#client-architecture)

[![WIRED on CockroachDB](/resources/doc/wired-preview.png?raw=true)](http://www.wired.com/2014/07/cockroachdb/)

## Status

**ALPHA**

* Gossip network
* Distributed transactions
* Cluster initialization and joining
* Basic Key-Value REST API
* Range splitting

**Next Steps**

* Raft consensus
* Rebalancing

See [TODO.md](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/TODO.md)

## Running Cockroach

Don't have (a recent version > 1.2 of) Docker? Follow the [instructions for installing Docker on your host system](http://docs.docker.com/installation/). If you run into trouble below, check first that you're not running an old version.

If you don't want to use Docker,
* set up the dev environment (see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md))
* `make build`
* replace `docker [...] [run|build] [...]` by `./cockroach` below.

#### Bootstrap and talk to a single node

```bash
$ docker run -d -p 8080:8080 "cockroachdb/cockroach" \
    init -rpc="localhost:0" \
    -certs="resources/test_certs" \
    -stores="ssd=/tmp/db"
```
This bootstraps and starts a single node with one temporary RocksDB instance at /tmp/db in the background (remove the `-d` flag if you want to see stdout).
Now let's talk to this node. You can use the [REST Explorer at
localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) or talk directly to the API:
```bash
$ curl -X POST -d "Hello" http://localhost:8080/kv/rest/entry/Cockroach
```
```json
{"header":{"timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616834949813367,"logical":0}}}
```
```bash
$ curl http://localhost:8080/kv/rest/entry/Cockroach
```
```json
{"header":{"timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616886486257568,"logical":0}},"value":{"bytes":"SGVsbG8=","timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616834949813367,"logical":0}}}
```
Note that `SGVsbG8=` equals `base64("Hello")`.

Among other things, you can also scan a key range:
```bash
$ curl "http://localhost:8080/kv/rest/range/?start=Ca&end=Cozz&limit=10"
```
```json
{"header":{"timestamp":{"wall_time":1416617120031733436,"logical":0}},"rows":[{"key":"Q29ja3JvYWNo","value":{"bytes":"SGVsbG8=","timestamp":{"wall_time":1416616834949813367,"logical":0}}}]}
```
Note that `Q29ja3JvYWNo` equals `base64("Cockroach")`.

#### Local Cluster Setup

*        (cd run; ./local-cluster.sh [start|stop])

#### Building the Docker images yourself
See [build/README.md](build/) for more information on the available Docker
images `cockroachdb/cockroach` and `cockroachdb/cockroach-dev`.
You can build both of these images yourself:

* `cockroachdb/cockroach-dev`: `(cd build ; ./build-docker-dev.sh)`
* `cockroachdb/cockroach`: `(cd build ; ./build-docker-deploy.sh)`
  (this will build the first image as well)

Once you've built your image, you may want to run the tests:
* `docker run "cockroachdb/cockroach-dev" test`
* `make acceptance`

## Get in touch

+ cockroach-db@googlegroups.com
+ \#cockroachdb on freenode

## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Design

For full design details, see the [original design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11k2EmhLGSbViBvi6_zFEiKzuXxYF49ZuuDJLe6O8gBU/edit?usp=sharing).

For a quick design overview, see the [Cockroach tech talk slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1e3TOxImRg6_nyMZspXvzb2u43D6gnS5422vAIN7J1n8/edit?usp=sharing)
or watch a presentation of the tech talk
* [at Yelp!](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MEAuFgsmND0&feature=youtu.be) by [Spencer Kimball](https://github.com/spencerkimball) (9/5/2014)
* [at the NoSQL User Group Cologne](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jI3LiKhqN0E) by [Tobias Schottdorf](https://github.com/tschottdorf) (11/5/2014).

Cockroach is a distributed key/value datastore which supports ACID
transactional semantics and versioned values as first-class
features. The primary design goal is global consistency and
survivability, hence the name. Cockroach aims to tolerate disk,
machine, rack, and even datacenter failures with minimal latency
disruption and no manual intervention. Cockroach nodes are symmetric;
a design goal is one binary with minimal configuration and no required
auxiliary services.

Cockroach implements a single, monolithic sorted map from key to value
where both keys and values are byte strings (not unicode). Cockroach
scales linearly (theoretically up to 4 exabytes (4E) of logical
data). The map is composed of one or more ranges and each range is
backed by data stored in [RocksDB][0] (a variant of [LevelDB][1]), and is
replicated to a total of three or more cockroach servers. Ranges are
defined by start and end keys. Ranges are merged and split to maintain
total byte size within a globally configurable min/max size
interval. Range sizes default to target 64M in order to facilitate
quick splits and merges and to distribute load at hotspots within a
key range. Range replicas are intended to be located in disparate
datacenters for survivability (e.g. { US-East, US-West, Japan }, {
Ireland, US-East, US-West}, { Ireland, US-East, US-West, Japan,
Australia }).

Single mutations to ranges are mediated via an instance of a
distributed consensus algorithm to ensure consistency. We’ve chosen to
use the [Raft consensus algorithm][2]. All consensus state is stored in
[RocksDB][0].

A single logical mutation may affect multiple key/value pairs. Logical
mutations have ACID transactional semantics. If all keys affected by a
logical mutation fall within the same range, atomicity and consistency
are guaranteed by [Raft][2]; this is the fast commit path. Otherwise, a
non-locking distributed commit protocol is employed between affected
ranges.

Cockroach provides snapshot isolation (SI) and serializable snapshot
isolation (SSI) semantics, allowing externally consistent, lock-free
reads and writes--both from an historical snapshot timestamp and from
the current wall clock time. SI provides lock-free reads and writes
but still allows write skew. SSI eliminates write skew, but introduces
a performance hit in the case of a contentious system. SSI is the
default isolation; clients must consciously decide to trade
correctness for performance. Cockroach implements a limited form of
linearalizability, providing ordering for any observer or chain of
observers.

Similar to [Spanner][3] directories, Cockroach allows configuration of
arbitrary zones of data. This allows replication factor, storage
device type, and/or datacenter location to be chosen to optimize
performance and/or availability. Unlike Spanner, zones are monolithic
and don’t allow movement of fine grained data on the level of entity
groups.

A [Megastore][4]-like message queue mechanism is also provided to 1)
efficiently sideline updates which can tolerate asynchronous execution
and 2) provide an integrated message queuing system for asynchronous
communication between distributed system components.

#### SQL - NoSQL - NewSQL Capabilities

![SQL - NoSQL - NewSQL Capabilities](/resources/doc/sql-nosql-newsql.png?raw=true)

## Datastore Goal Articulation

There are other important axes involved in data-stores which are less
well understood and/or explained. There is lots of cross-dependency,
but it's safe to segregate two more of them as (a) scan efficiency,
and (b) read vs write optimization.

#### Datastore Scan Efficiency Spectrum

Scan efficiency refers to the number of IO ops required to scan a set
of sorted adjacent rows matching a criteria. However, it's a
complicated topic, because of the options (or lack of options) for
controlling physical order in different systems.

* Some designs either default to or only support "heap organized"
  physical records (Oracle, MySQL, Postgres, SQLite, MongoDB). In this
  design, a naive sorted-scan of an index involves one IO op per
  record.
* In these systems it's possible to "fully cover" a sorted-query in an
  index with some write-amplification.
* In some systems it's possible to put the primary record data in a
  sorted btree instead of a heap-table (default in MySQL/Innodb,
  option in Oracle).
* Sorted-order LSM NoSQL could be considered index-organized-tables,
  with efficient scans by the row-key. (HBase).
* Some NoSQL is not optimized for sorted-order retrieval, because of
  hash-bucketing, primarily based on the Dynamo design. (Cassandra,
  Riak)

![Datastore Scan Efficiency Spectrum](/resources/doc/scan-efficiency.png?raw=true)

#### Read vs. Write Optimization Spectrum

Read vs write optimization is a product of the underlying sorted-order
data-structure used. Btrees are read-optimized. Hybrid write-deferred
trees are a balance of read-and-write optimizations (shuttle-trees,
fractal-trees, stratified-trees). LSM separates write-incorporation
into a separate step, offering a tunable amount of read-to-write
optimization. An "ideal" LSM at 0%-write-incorporation is a log, and
at 100%-write-incorporation is a btree.

The topic of LSM is confused by the fact that LSM is not an algorithm,
but a design pattern, and usage of LSM is hindered by the lack of a
de-facto optimal LSM design. LevelDB/RocksDB is one of the more
practical LSM implementations, but it is far from optimal. Popular
text-indicies like Lucene are non-general purpose instances of
write-optimized LSM.

Further, there is a dependency between access pattern
(read-modify-write vs blind-write and write-fraction), cache-hitrate,
and ideal sorted-order algorithm selection. At a certain
write-fraction and read-cache-hitrate, systems achieve higher total
throughput with write-optimized designs, at the cost of increased
worst-case read latency. As either write-fraction or
read-cache-hitrate approaches 1.0, write-optimized designs provide
dramatically better sustained system throughput when record-sizes are
small relative to IO sizes.

Given this information, data-stores can be sliced by their
sorted-order storage algorithm selection. Btree stores are
read-optimized (Oracle, SQLServer, Postgres, SQLite2, MySQL, MongoDB,
CouchDB), hybrid stores are read-optimized with better
write-throughput (Tokutek MySQL/MongoDB), while LSM-variants are
write-optimized (HBase, Cassandra, SQLite3/LSM, Cockroach).

![Read vs. Write Optimization Spectrum](/resources/doc/read-vs-write.png?raw=true)

## Architecture

Cockroach implements a layered architecture, with various
subdirectories implementing layers as appropriate. The highest level of
abstraction is the SQL layer (currently not implemented). It depends
directly on the [structured data API][5] ([structured/][6]). The structured
data API provides familiar relational concepts such as schemas,
tables, columns, and indexes. The structured data API in turn depends
on the [distributed key value store][7] ([kv/][8]). The distributed key
value store handles the details of range addressing to provide the
abstraction of a single, monolithic key value store. It communicates
with any number of [cockroach nodes][9] ([server/][10]), storing the actual
data. Each node contains one or more [stores][11] ([storage/][12]), one per
physical device.

![Cockroach Architecture](/resources/doc/architecture.png?raw=true)

Each store contains potentially many ranges, the lowest-level unit of
key-value data. Ranges are replicated using the [Raft][2] consensus
protocol. The diagram below is a blown up version of stores from four
of the five nodes in the previous diagram. Each range is replicated
three ways using raft. The color coding shows associated range
replicas.

![Range Architecture Blowup](/resources/doc/architecture-blowup.png?raw=true)

## Client Architecture

Cockroach nodes serve client traffic on two primary HTTP endpoints: a
RESTful endpoint which treats key/value pairs and sequences of
key/value pairs as resources; and a fully-featured key/value DB API
which accepts requests as either application/x-protobuf or
application/json. Client implementations consist of an HTTP sender
(transport) and a transactional sender which implements a simple
exponential backoff / retry protocol, depending on Cockroach error
codes.

The REST and DB client gateways accept incoming requests and send them
through a transaction coordinator, which handles transaction
heartbeats on behalf of clients, provides optimization pathways, and
resolves write intents on transaction commit or abort. The transaction
coordinator passes requests onto a distributed sender, which looks up
index metadata, caches the results, and routes internode RPC traffic
based on where the index metadata indicates keys are located in the
distributed cluster.

In addition to the gateways for external REST and DB client traffic,
each Cockroach node provides the full key/value API (including all
internal methods) via a Go RPC server endpoint. The RPC server
endpoint forwards requests to one or more local stores depending
on the specified key range.

Internally, each Cockroach node uses the Go implementation of the
Cockroach client in order to transactionally update system key/value
data; for example during split and merge operations to update index
metadata records. Unlike an external application, the internal client
eschews the HTTP sender and instead directly shares the transaction
coordinator and distributed sender used by the REST and DB client
gateways.

![Client Architecture](/resources/doc/client-architecture.png?raw=true)

[0]: http://rocksdb.org/
[1]: https://code.google.com/p/leveldb/
[2]: https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/wiki/download/attachments/11370504/raft.pdf
[3]: http://research.google.com/archive/spanner.html
[4]: http://research.google.com/pubs/pub36971.html
[5]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/structured
[6]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/structured
[7]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/kv
[8]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/kv
[9]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/server
[10]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/server
[11]: http://godoc.org/github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/storage
[12]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/tree/master/storage
